Final block design draft (#508)
hashintel/hash: sites/dev/src/_pages/blog/1_block-design.mdx

![A diagram of a set of blocks connected through the block protocol to an embedding application on the other side](blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_2.png)

This opens up a world of possibilities; as a developer you can build any block you can dream up, publish it to the [Block Hub](https://blockprotocol.org/hub) or [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/), and allow other developers to download and use it in any protocol-compliant application.

This also raises some new challenges though. For your blocks to be successful, loved, and widely used, they need to look and feel great across a wide variety of contexts. **Which means you have to design them well.**

This doesn't mean add fancy gradients and drop shadows to everything. It means following these two principles:

1.  Blocks should be visually simple, minimal, and blend in with their surroundings

> 2.  Blocks should follow tried-and-true interaction design principles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Blocks should follow tried-and-true interaction design principles
```

The first principle helps blocks feel at home in the applications that use them. Each application will have its own visual style and set of design conventions they follow; a design system they've worked hard to establish and keep consistent across their product.

> We've designed the protocol with this in mind; we allow applications to pass styling variables into blocks such as `primaryColour` and `fontFamily` (more on this below) which helps them match the visual styling of their environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've designed the protocol with this in mind; we allow applications to pass styling variables into blocks such as `primaryColor` and `fontFamily` (more on this below) which helps them match the visual styling of their environments.
```

There's more to design than visual appearance though. Blocks need to behave predictably and consistently for the people using them. This means being both internally consistent, and consistent with the way most other websites on the web work. This principle is known as [Jakob's Law](https://www.nngroup.com/videos/jakobs-law-internet-ux/) - users spend 99% of their time on apps and websites other than yours, and they expect them to all work the same way. There is no need to reinvent the wheel or the dropdown menu.

> There is a much higher risk of inconsistent behaviour when every block in an application is designed and built by someone different, without any shared conventions or rules. We've all felt the frustration of trying to use an app that has 99 button colours, icons that change meaning across screens, and labels that sporadically switch between “cancel,” “discard”, and “delete.” These small frustrations add up and will quickly deplete a user's patience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a much higher risk of inconsistent behavior when every block in an application is designed and built by someone different, without any shared conventions or rules. We've all felt the frustration of trying to use an app that has 99 button colours, icons that change meaning across screens, and labels that sporadically switch between “cancel,” “discard”, and “delete.” These small frustrations add up and will quickly deplete a user's patience.
```

Thankfully, you can avoid most of these usability problems by following our visual styling principles and best practices when you're creating blocks.

## Styling Block Protocol blocks

> We've setup our [block starter template](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/tree/main/packages/block-template) with a couple of helpful CSS files:

Reviewer: Noun vs verb

```suggestion
We've set up our [block starter template](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/tree/main/packages/block-template) with a couple of helpful CSS files:
```

- A CSS reset file
- A base styles file with a set of root variables you can adjust

Our base styles file is lightly opinionated and sets up a styling base that will help your block look and feel similar to others.

> It comes with a default palette of colours you can use, a typographic scale, a spacing scale, and other similar base styles. You can read more details about what the base stylesheet includes in our [documentation](#).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It comes with a default palette of colors you can use, a typographic scale, a spacing scale, and other similar base styles. You can read more details about what the base stylesheet includes in our [documentation](#).
```

### Accepting styles from embedding applications

> The blocks you build will be used inside other applications; we call these "embedding application."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The blocks you build will be usable inside other applications; we call these "embedding applications."
```

> We designed the protocol to give embedding applications control over the way blocks appear in their product. We give embedding applications the final say over how a block looks, as they have more context about the environment it lives within and how people will use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol gives embedding applications control over the way blocks appear within them. We give embedding applications the final say over how a block looks, as they have more context about the environment it lives within and how people will use it.
```

> Every Block Protocol block you build must accept a `styleVariables` object that the embedding application can pass in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every Block Protocol block you build should accept a `styleVariables` object that the embedding application can pass in.
```

I believe this is likely to be finalized as a _should_, and not a _must_ in the spec (https://blockprotocol.org/spec/appendix-a-styling). cc @CiaranMn

## Usability and UX principles

No matter how beautiful a block looks, it's not worth much to anyone if it's difficult to use. Soft drop shadows and smooth gradients aren't going to delight the user if they're furiously trying to find the “save” button, and you've stashed it inside a dropdown menu that's too low contrast to see.

<img
  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_1.png"
  width={900}
  height={480}
  alt="A text input field with a very low contrast dropdown menu below it. Inside there is a low-constrast 'save' button and a much larger and more prominent 'delte' button."
/>

Usability and user experience design (UX) is a whole discipline in its own right, and we can't cover everything in this guide. We're not expecting you to become a UX designer before you can start building blocks. However, knowing the basics of UX and some of the most important principles will go a long way in making you a better block builder.

#### 1. Keep it vanilla

There's a reason designers won't stop banging on about minimalism and simplicity. Adding in fancy details, decorations, or flashy animations that don't need to be there will increase the visual complexity of your block.

> It may take users longer to figure out how to use the block, or may get in the way of whatever they're trying to do with it.

Reviewer: Do we need a new line above this one? @MaggieAppleton

Author: Doesn't show up in the final rendered version. The extra lines are just added by the MDX auto-formatting in VS Code.

In practice this means avoiding loud, wild visual design choices. Like adding a leopard pattern to your form background, or using a funky 1960's font for labels.

<img
  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_3.png"
  width={1050}
  height={414}
  alt="Two callout boxes. The first has very plain styling and limited use of colour. The second has a leopard background, many bold colours, and an unconventional novelty font."
/>

> Because blocks will be used in a wide variety of situations, it is _extra important_ to make them boring enough to blend in with the wallpaper. Use colour sparingly, and only to highlight active areas or draw attention to important elements like call to action buttons. Avoid noisy patterns or textures. Only use animation for subtle transitions, or to communicate the state of the elements to users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because blocks will be used in a wide variety of situations, it is _extra important_ to make them boring enough to blend in with the wallpaper. Use color sparingly, and only to highlight active areas or draw attention to important elements like call to action buttons. Avoid noisy patterns or textures. Only use animation for subtle transitions, or to communicate the state of the elements to users.
```

This guide is for developers who want to build blocks with the [Block Protocol](https://blockprotocol.org). The protocol allows you build reusable blocks that will work in any application that also follows the protocol. It acts as the communication layer between an application and a block. The block and the application don't need to know anything about how the other is built. They only need to follow the protocol to work seamlessly together.

> ![A diagram of a set of blocks connected through the block protocol to an embedding application on the other side](blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_2.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![A diagram of a set of blocks connected through the Block Protocol to an embedding application on the other side](blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_2.png)
```

### Accepting styles from embedding applications

The blocks you build will be used inside other applications; we call these "embedding application."

We designed the protocol to give embedding applications control over the way blocks appear in their product. We give embedding applications the final say over how a block looks, as they have more context about the environment it lives within and how people will use it.

Every Block Protocol block you build must accept a `styleVariables` object that the embedding application can pass in.

> This object defines a set of variables that control the basic styles of the block. We've designed these to maximise consistency and simplicity within your block. You can see the full list of these in the [styling section](#) of our documentation. Here's a rundown of the major categories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This object defines a set of variables that control the basic styles of the block. We've designed these to maximize consistency and simplicity within your block. You can see the full list of these in the [styling section](#) of our documentation. Here's a rundown of the major categories:
```

> 1.  Colours - a range of shades for neutrals, primary, secondary, tertiary, warning, and danger.
> 2.  Typography – font family, base size, scaling ratios, and line heights
> 3.  Spacing – base size and scaling ratios
> 4.  Borders – weight, colours, and radius
> 5.  Box shadows
> 6.  Icon sizes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Colors - a range of shades for neutrals, primary, secondary, tertiary, warning, and danger.
1.  Typography – font family, base size, scaling ratios, and line heights
1.  Spacing – base size and scaling ratios
1.  Borders – weight, colors, and radius
1.  Box shadows
1.  Icon sizes
```

  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_1.png"
  width={900}
  height={480}

>   alt="A text input field with a very low contrast dropdown menu below it. Inside there is a low-constrast 'save' button and a much larger and more prominent 'delte' button."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alt="A text input field with a very low contrast dropdown menu below it. Inside there is a low contrast 'save' button and a much larger and more prominent 'delete' button."
```

  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_3.png"
  width={1050}
  height={414}

>   alt="Two callout boxes. The first has very plain styling and limited use of colour. The second has a leopard background, many bold colours, and an unconventional novelty font."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  alt="Two callout boxes. The first has very plain styling and limited use of color. The second has a leopard background, many bold colors, and an unconventional novelty font."
```

  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_5.png"
  width={685}
  height={603}
  alt="Two placeholder screens. The first shows a clear CTA in the middle for users to upload an image. The second shows a user dragging and dropping a file into the area."
/>

Once they have entered or selected data, ensure you design a loading state that lets them know if they need to wait a moment for the data to load. If the loading process might take a while, giving them buttons to pause and resume it may also be a good idea. Clear feedback and [visibilty of system status](https://www.google.com/search?q=ux+visibility+system+status) is always critical to help users feel informed and in control.

<img
  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_6.png"
  width={661}
  height={240}

>   alt="A loading screen showing how long left until the image uploads and buttons to pause or cancel the process"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  alt="A loading screen showing how long left until the image uploads and buttons to pause or cancel the process."
```

  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_7.png"
  width={997}
  height={403}

>   alt="Images of a button and a block of text with two examples. One where they pass the AA contrast ratio threshold, and nother where they're too faint and don't pass the threshold."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  alt="Images of a button and a block of text with two examples. One where they pass the AA contrast ratio threshold, and another where they're too faint and don't pass the threshold."
```

<img
  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_9.png"
  width={422}
  height={189}

>   alt="A row of uncommon icons without labels"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  alt="A row of uncommon icons without labels."
```

/>

Ideally, icons should always have text labels next to them. This prevents users from having to guess what the icon means. This is especially important if you're using icons that aren't widely used in other applications.

<img
  src="blog/1_block-design/DesignGuidelines_10.png"
  width={1028}
  height={192}

>   alt="A row of uncommon icons with labels"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  alt="A row of uncommon icons with labels."
```
